<mediawiki xmlns="http://www.mediawiki.org/xml/export-0.3/" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.mediawiki.org/xml/export-0.3/ http://www.mediawiki.org/xml/export-0.3.xsd" version="0.3" xml:lang="en">
  <siteinfo>
    <sitename>BioLib</sitename>
    <base>http://biolib.open-bio.org/wiki/Main_Page</base>
    <generator>MediaWiki 1.15.1</generator>
    <case>first-letter</case>
    <namespaces>
      <namespace key="-2">Media</namespace>
      <namespace key="-1">Special</namespace>
      <namespace key="0" />
      <namespace key="1">Talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="2">User</namespace>
      <namespace key="3">User talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="4">BioLib</namespace>
      <namespace key="5">BioLib talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="6">File</namespace>
      <namespace key="7">File talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="8">MediaWiki</namespace>
      <namespace key="9">MediaWiki talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="10">Template</namespace>
      <namespace key="11">Template talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="12">Help</namespace>
      <namespace key="13">Help talk</namespace>
      <namespace key="14">Category</namespace>
      <namespace key="15">Category talk</namespace>
    </namespaces>
  </siteinfo>
  <page>
    <title>Main Page</title>
    <id>1</id>
    <revision>
      <id>318</id>
      <timestamp>2009-11-28T10:22:30Z</timestamp>
      <contributor>
        <username>Pjotrp</username>
        <id>2</id>
      </contributor>
      <comment>/* CONTRIBUTING */</comment>
      <text xml:space="preserve">= BioLib: libraries for the Bio* languages =

''BioLib'' brings together a set of opensource C/C++ libraries and makes them available to all Bio* languages: BioPerl,
BioRuby, BioPython, BioJAVA and Bioconductor. 

'''Currently supported languages: Perl, Python and Ruby (R and JAVA are planned)'''.

== MODULES ==

current BioLib modules:

* [[BioLib Affymetrix]] reads Affymetrix microarray .CEL and .CDF formats
* [[BioLib Staden io_lib]] reads/writes sequencer trace files, including SFF, ABI, SCF, ALF and PLN formats
* [[BioLib R/qtl]] support with OO model for Ruby

and soon to be included BioLib modules:

* [[BioliB Emboss]] the European molecular biology open software suite
* [[BioLib Bio++]] libraries for sequence analysis, phylogenetics, molecular evolution and population genetics
* [[BioLib libsequence]] library designed to aid writing applications for genomics and evolutionary genetics

If you have a requirement not listed here: please use the [[Biolib Poll]]!

== NEWS ==

* First EMBOSS mappings for Ruby, Perl and Python - a write up on [[mapping EMBOSS]] (November 2009)
* [http://emboss.sourceforge.net/ EMBOSS] will pursue Biolib mappings (July 2009)
* Xin Shuai and Adam Smith have finalized mapping libsequence and Bio++ libraries to BioLib. See Xin's project [[User:David]] page and [http://gsoc-biolib-libsequence.blogspot.com/ blog], and Adam's project [https://www.nescent.org/wg_phyloinformatics/PhyloSoC:Mapping_the_Bio%2B%2B_Phylogenetics_toolkit_to_R/BioConductor_and_BioJAVA_using_BioLib page] and [http://gsoc-biopp.blogspot.com/ blog].

== MILESTONES ==

* BOSC Presentation ([http://thebird.nl/download/biolib-bosc2009.pdf slides] July 2009) 
* Microsoft Windows support added with Cygwin (May 2009)
* BioLib is getting a boost from the Google Summer of Code initiative, thanks to [https://www.nescent.org/wg_phyloinformatics/Phyloinformatics_Summer_of_Code_2009 Nescent] (April 2009)
* GNU Science Library (GSL) support is added to the new [[ASciLib]] (A Science Lib) project (April 2009)
* ''Python'' mappings provided for Affyio and Staden (March 2009)
* BioLib supports OSX; Affyio mapped to ''Perl'' (February 2009)
* ''Perl'' and ''Ruby'' mappings provided for the '''Staden [http://sourceforge.net/projects/staden/ io_lib] library''', for reading of trace files in many formats (January 2009)
* The source repository has moved to [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/ github]. The latest changelog is [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/commits/master here] (November 2008)
* ''BioRuby'' is the first to benefit from BioLib's Affy support. See the [http://github.com/pjotrp/bioruby/tree/master/lib/bio/db/microarray/affymetrix Ruby source code] on Github (September 2008)
* BioLib builds for ''Ruby'' on Linux - both Ruby gem and a [[NIX]] package (August 2008)
* '''Affyio library''' runs for ''Ruby'' reading Affymetrix cel and cdf info correctly - see also [[BioLib Affymetrix]] (June 2008)
* An '''example library''' gets built for ''Python'', ''Ruby'' and ''Perl'' using SWIG and cmake 2.6 (June 2008)

see also the [[Road map]]. There is potential for other languages like JAVA, R and OCaml.

== INTRODUCTION ==

BioLib pools resources and provides the mechanisms for having one code
base for all important programming languages.

The primary mapping mechanism to the Bio* languages is [[SWIG]]. SWIG has
come a long way in the last years and maps to all modern high-level
languages. See also [[supported data types]] and [[BioLib_best_practises]] .

The primary objective of BioLib is compatibility between languages and
multi-platform support. The secondary objective of BioLib is
efficiency - both of CPU and RAM (why bother to write in C,
otherwise).  Think of BioLib as a repository, or kernel, for low-level processing and
analysis of biological data. BioLib was incepted at the 
Tokyo Biohackathon 2008.

For more information see the [[Road map]].

== DOCUMENTATION ==

The API of included BioLib modules can be found in the [http://thebird.nl/apidoc/biolib/index.html API Documentation]. This documentation is generated straight from the source code. Translating the API to the mapped Perl or Ruby methods is straightforward. One example is [http://thebird.nl/apidoc/biolib/index.html here], others are in the test files (for [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/tree/master/src/mappings/swig/perl/test Perl], [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/tree/master/src/mappings/swig/ruby/test Ruby] and
[http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/tree/master/src/mappings/swig/python/test Python]).

== DOWNLOADING ==

For the latest version of ''BioLib'' see the latest [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/tree/master%2Fdoc%2FRELEASE_NOTES.txt?raw=true RELEASE NOTES].

BioLib releases (tgz, tar.bz2 and zip) can be downloaded from:

http://bio3.biobeat.org/download/nix-biology/

For the direct access to the latest source tree use

* [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/tree/master Biolib on github]
* And clone the (master) repository with:

  git clone git://github.com/pjotrp/biolib.git

== INSTALLATION ==


Quick instructions : after downloading the source run

  cd biolib
  ./configure
  make
  make test
  make install

which, by default, creates the ''Perl'' bindings. Configuration parameters are:

  ./configure --with-ruby

or

  ./configure --with-python

to install a subset, for example Staden-io-lib for ''Ruby'' use

  ./configure --with-ruby --with-staden

For more information read the [http://github.com/pjotrp/biolib/tree/master/INSTALL INSTALL] file.

== REQUESTING MODULES ==

If you need a C/C++/FORTRAN/R module or library linked against one of the popular scripting languages, please make that known through the [[Biolib Poll]]. See also [[Interesting_libraries]].

== CONTRIBUTING ==

All developers writing low-level bioinformatics libraries are
encouraged to contribute. A write-up on what it took to map some of the EMBOSS functionality can
be found in [[Mapping EMBOSS]]. For a HOWTO read [[Add C Library]]. If you feel you have something that can be
shared by other developers sign up to the BioLib mailing list (see below).

Unit testing is a critical part of BioLib. Unit tests are conveniently
written in high-level languages.

The multiplatform build system is based on [[CMake]]. The source trees are
maintained with [http://git.or.cz/ git] distributed version control.

== MAILING LIST ==

Subscribe to the BioLib mailing list [http://lists.open-bio.org/mailman/listinfo/biolib-dev here].

== PACKAGING ==

General support for major platforms is aimed for, including 32-bit and 64-bit Linux, OS X, *BSD, Solaris and Windows.</text>
    </revision>
  </page>
</mediawiki>
